Hi Hi this is Steve with VIP Grant I'm looking for the person that recently filed the business license for.... Perfect the reason I'm reaching out to you regarding your business license a lot of businesses don't know that there is a grant available for them to get a $3000 plus package at less than quarter of the price because they are A new business what we do is in the next 72 hours we build your website we get you a custom Jingle we get you your business emails and so much more And then over the next 12 months we handle everything for you we are simple phone call away anything you need done changes updates we are there for you Within 24 hours all of those updates will be completed rather than going through multiple different agencies and paying thousands of dollars or trying to do it yourself and spending hundreds of hours updating and learning that basically breaks down to you paying $2 an hour for our service Is your time worth more than $2 an hour. What I'd like to do is I'd like to show you and let you listen to a sample of what we can do for you and get an understanding of what you're looking for and then go ahead and get everything built for you. If you want to jump on your laptop real quick I can go ahead and show you exactly what your website would look like Show you exactly what Your custom business Jingle what sound like And while you're getting your laptop I'm going to tell you everything that comes with this package . You get 10 page website with advanced mobile optimization in SEO you get three professional audio jingles so you make one as your custom theme song for your business and then you could set up one for your advertising and maybe a holiday one We set up your Stripe payment so you can accept payments on your website you get a CRM on your website that's so you can keep track of everything, SCRM We'll have your leads your sales tracking calendar projects tasks documents reports and so much more We also a library of business documents everything to help you get any type of licensing you need your employee handbooks everything down to emergency exit route design also we help you with any type of AI that you want to need and we handle your social media posting now that type of program you would either have to go to four different companies paying thousands of dollars for each one or because of your new business license you pay 499 and go to one place and like I said 12 month white glove service you simply make a phone call 24 to 48 hours later what you needed done is completed... Perfect you have your laptop 

find out what they want
=======================

What is your primary service?

What specific areas do you serve?

Who is your ideal customer?

What makes your business unique?

do you have a biz phone number clients call?

What is your public email?

Do you have a logo?

What do you want for your brand colors?

What do you want the website's main goal to do

What action should visitors take first?


